---
title: Loosely Coupled Teams
date: 03-09-2026
description: The same architectural principle that makes software flexible makes organizations flexible too.
stage: RAW_RECORDING
---
I want to talk about loosely coupled teams. What, what, what is loosely coupled teams? And ultimately, what loosely couple teams is? Is it's an answer to a question. It's an answer to a problem. Right? It's a solution to a problem. The problem is that your teams, if, if the responsibilities of each team spill over into other teams, And you have a bunch of people on a bunch of different teams that, and the responsibilities keep spilling over, and Then what starts to happen is subdependencies start to build within those teams, right? So let's say you have a DevOps team. And, uh, you might have a DevOps team, and in order, and you might have your streamaligned team. You know, let's say you're, I don't know, building an invoicing app. The most basic software that has ever existed. Well, probably one of the 1st softwares to ever actually exist. So, you have this uh, you have this invoicing software. And this invoicing software, you have an invoice team, and you might have a, I don't know, collections team. who's, you know, whose job it is is to build out the collections kind of feature, right? The collection side of things. This is, this is going to fall apart really quickly. But um, we might come up with a different analogy. You know, come up with a better set of features, right? But, let's say you have your two teams here. You have your, um, give me a minute. I want to come up with a better, a better example here. Let's say you have, uh, yeah, you know what? You have your admin team and your, your, uh, member, your member team. We'll go with, we'll go with that. So you have your member facing team and you have your admin facing team. That sounds good to me. Let's go with that. So let's say you have 4 different teams. You have your member team, your admin team, then you have your, uh, DevOps team who handles all of the deployment and all of the pipelines. and all of the infrastructure. And then you have your, uh, then you have your, uh, Then you have your testing team. You have your QA team. Right? So you've got these 4 teams. No? Let's say you go to your member facing team. And you go to their member facing team and you say, hey, member facing team. I need you to build out this, this invoicing, uh, this invoicing feature. And they got, they are, okay, well, it's going to take me X amount of time. They try and start building it out. And And I'll behold, you go back to them and you say, hey, I thought you said you'd have this done by now. And that team, they go. I mean, yeah, but I mean, we're code complete, but actually, the reality is, I need, I need to go back over to the dog. It really the dev-op steam. You really have to go over to the DevOp team and have them figure it out. Right? So, and the devil, and then you kind of go over your dev up, see me, you're like, hey, dev ups, what's going on here? Like, I thought this needed to be deployed. I thought you could, thought you should, you should have deployed this. What the heck, man? What's going on? The Dev team says it's all finished. And then the DevOps team goes, ah, you know what? Actually, no, it's not us. It's the QA team. You actually really want to have a solution? You got to go over to the QA team. And then you go back over to the QA team and you're like, all right, QA team, what's going on? What's happening? Why is this feature not going on? Because Demops told me that they're waiting on you for something. And QA goes, no, no, no, no, no. I've been done the whole time. You really have to go over and talk to the dev team. And the Dev team is like, Well, you see where this is going, right? And now I'm exaggerating this example a little bit, but honestly not by much. There's, I have seen, I have absolutely seen this happen in, in, uh, in organizations. I have seen this happen. I have, as a consultant, I have guys on my consulting team. I have my consultants who should probably know better. who should have probably read through loosely couple teams, who look at this and they go, Who, who, who, look at their situation and go, well, yeah, I can't finish this task because dev-ops, right? And and I'm just sitting here like, what an absolute nerd. What an absolute idiot. Like, you, dude, you need to figure this out. If you need to take a step back, you need to take a step back from this and figure out how to solve the loosening couple teams issue. Because what you're feeling is you're feeling the Lucy couple teams problem right now. That's what you're feeling. You're sensing it, you're feeling it, No. What's the solution to this problem? Actually, what is the problem? Let's talk a little bit deeper about what the problem is. The problem isn't. The problem isn't the responsibility gets, the buck ends up getting passed around the company. You know, that's not the problem. Right? The real problem is that you can't debug the real problem. The problem might be that you have a developer who doesn't know what they're doing, and they're in way over their head, and they've have 5 years of experience, so they have their pride in it a little bit, but they've really had, don't actually know what they're doing. So, they, they, can't kind of just rely on everybody else and it just bunks the entire system down. That might be your problem. Or you might have all really, really solid devs. But, There's actually a genuine dependency on something. Right? So there's a genuine dependency and there's a genuine dependency that takes time for that loop to exist, for that loop for you to go through that loop. Like, okay, yeah, I have to, I have to go to devops. And then the mops has to come back. And then don't, and then, and then there's, you know, and then there's QA. So, like, if I want one thing to go through my my loop, I have to go. I have to wait at least 3 days before any changes end up in production. Right? Because it has to go to this guy, then it has to go to that guy, and then it's got to go over there. And then it's, and then you, by the time it's gone, gone around that loop 5 times, because one dude had an issue with it, each time it tried to go around that damn loop. You're sitting here and you're just like, what in the world's been like 3 weeks and this dang thing isn't isn't through. Right? And, you know, then somebody goes on vacation and then it's like, what in the absolute nuts is going on? This is an absolute nightmare. It sucks. This is this is this is kind, this is the problem, the problem. Is fundamentally not that you're, you have these. Is not this, these dependencies across teams, the problem, fundamentally, is that it's really, really difficult to debug where the problem exists. It's incredibly difficult to debug where the problem exists. That's the fundamental issue. Okay? That's the problem. You don't know where it exists. And Until you have a team that is debuggable. And that you can put your thumb on, and you can say, okay, I'm going to put my thumb on this on this team, put pressure on this team so that they can push forward. They can improve. Right? Until you're able to put your thumb on that team and say, No, no, no, no. I have given you all the responsibility. Okay, here's, here's, here's the answer to, here's the solution to your problem. Solution to your problem is loosely a couple teams. And despite what it sounds like, The goal here is actually to completely and absolutely isolate your team. You don't want a DevOps team involved. You don't want a QA team involved. You don't want a security team involved. You pretty much want to completely and absolutely isolate your team on one dimension. And that one dimension, that one dimension that you're going to isolate your team on, is going to be responsibility. You're going to isolate the team on responsibility. You're going to isolate them on a responsibility, and you're going to isolate them on authority. So, responsibility and authority. When you isolate this team, based on responsibility, and based on authority, What what will happen? Is you go to them and you say, hey, team of five. Hey guys. So, I need you to build this thing. And then they go, oh, okay, well, it'll take us this long. And then, okay, cool. And then you wait that long and they haven't got it done. And you go, why don't you have it done? And they go, well, there's a, there's this dev ops. you're like, no, no, no, no, no. I've given you authority. What wrong? What is blocking you from getting this done? And then that team, they go, oh, well, we need uh, we need this thing in order to deploy it. We need this permission in order to deploy it. And like, okay, I'll get you that permission. Here's that permission. Now, Now, now you have that permission. What's keeping you from, what's keeping you from getting this done? And then, well, I mean, um, I don't know. You, what you want, is you want your team to have 0 excuses. No excuses at all. Is no excuses. You want them to, you're going to give them all the rope to hang themselves with. You're gonna give every single little thing to them. And you're gonna, you're gonna pour your heart out to these teams. And you say, you literally have the authority tomorrow. To go and break the app in production, if you wish, because you are QA or we will give you resources to do QA if you cannot. Or if you need resources to learn how to do security better, we will give you those resources. We will, we will take a seat. Find a security guide and put them on your team. You will have that, those resources so that that person can train you to be the person you need to be. But all of the authority ends up on that team. You practically isolate that team entirely in terms of permissions. Right? They get to do whatever the heck they want, which is in their bubble. But they are not allowed to touch anybody else's bubble. You can't touch anybody, but anybody else's code base. You can't touch anybody outside this code. You can't touch anybody that says pipeline. They have their own pipelines. They have their own deployment process. They own their own deployment process. They own their own deployment, they own their own security. own their own QA. Now, this is probably terrifying to, to, um, some people, Because it's like, why on earth would I, would I give all of that authority to this one team? And the reason is, because you can debug it. Right? When they say it's going to take 2 weeks and it takes a month, You can debug the problem. You can say, okay, all right. We got 5 people, we got 5 people in this room. Right? We got 5 people in this room. Between the 5 of you? For some reason, you said it took 2 weeks, and it took a month. And I have made darn sure that every single person in this room, you're the only ones who have the authority to do what you need to do. So somewhere, look, I know that the problem is somewhere in this room. And we can sit down and we can have a conversation about it until, Until we are able to solve that problem. I do not recommend having this actual meeting. This would be a very trust breaking experience with your developers, because developers, as, as interesting as it is, tends to be slightly snowflakes. Okay? In general, they get offended really easily. Right? They tend to get offended very easily. So, Um, So, but the reality of the fact is when you sit there in your office and you look at this team and you go, well, something's wrong with this team. I don't know what. But something's wrong with this team. You know, without a doubt, that it's one of those 5 dudes. That's, that the where the problem lies. And it could be an education issue. It could just be a confidence issue, could be an authority issue, could be a, you know, there's something wrong, but you know without a doubt it lives on the, on that team. It lives with those 5 dudes. Because it lives with those 5 dudes, you can debug it. That's the genius. of the concept of loosely coupled teams. Because all of the other capabilities, Every single other capability. You can now pull levers on that just that one team. And you can do things to pull levers on that just that one team. And you can say, to that team. Yeah. I can now help you improve your continuous integration. I can now help you improve your testing philosophy so that we don't end up breaking prod. I can now help you do this. I can now help you do all that because, wherever that issue, for that, for your little optimization levers, ended up. isn't passed through the entire organization in a bunch of awkward ways. It's, it's just there. You just know how where the problem is. At least you know where the problem is. You might not know what the problem is, but you know where the problem is. That's what loosely a couple teams is about. And if you, I'm maybe giving a little bit more of a tongue in cheek explanation for this. Maybe a little bit more, um, aggressive assertive authority. I't know what you're going to, what you're going to call it. But, but essentially, what I'm teaching here is what's in the book. Okay, what's the main concept? I haven't read the whole book in depth. So I'm gonna, I might be, be wrong on some, some parts of it, but I, it's the main kind of concept and some of the high level concepts of the book, uh, team topologies, right? You have this stream aligned team, right? You have the streamline team and then you have supporting teams. You have these, these, you know, you have a security team, but the security team, they don't have the authority to, to write code into production. I think you might have authority to write code for scripts. you know, to, you know, make sure that the, you know, the code has certain things, but they don't have the authority to change a code. So, At least for the, for the repos that are owned by the individual that, that we're looking at. So for the individual team that we're looking at. So, Them's the basics of, that's the concept of Lucy couple teams. That's what you want to do. Right? And I don't think that there's a prescribed, like, method to doing this necessarily, right? I don't have a, a thing to get you for that. Right? But in general, that's the concept. That's the baseline concept of of loosely coupled teams and why it's so important. Right? So. There's that. And that's, we'll see a couple of teams. Let me double check and make sure I'm not missing anything.
